The calcium channel inhibitor lacidipine inhibits Zika virus replication in neural progenitor cells

Author links open overlay panelBodineBezemerKoen W.R.van Cleef1Gijs J.OverheulPascalMiesenRonald P.van Rij
Department of Medical Microbiology, Radboud University Medical Center, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, P.O. Box 9101, 6500 HB, Nijmegen, the Netherlands
Received 24 December 2021, Revised 21 March 2022, Accepted 27 March 2022, Available online 31 March 2022, Version of Record 5 April 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.antiviral.2022.105313

Abstract
After decades of being considered non-pathogenic, Zika virus (ZIKV) emerged as an important threat to human health during the epidemic of 2015–2016. ZIKV infections are usually asymptomatic, but can cause Guillain-Barré syndrome in adults and microcephaly in newborns. As there are currently no approved antiviral drugs against ZIKV, we tested anti-ZIKV activity of compounds from the NIH Clinical Collection for which we previously showed antiviral activity against the related dengue virus. One of the top hits from the screen was lacidipine, a 1,4-dihydropyridine calcium antagonist that is approved as an antihypertensive drug. Our data show that lacidipine is antiviral against ZIKV (strain H/PF/2013) in both Vero cells and induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived human neural progenitor cells with IC50 values of 3.0 μM and <50 nM, respectively. The antiviral effect was also observed against four other ZIKV strains from the African and Asian lineages. Time-of-addition and replicon assays indicated that lacidipine acts at the post-entry stage of the viral replication cycle, inhibiting viral genome replication. Lacidipine altered the subcellular distribution of free cholesterol and neutral lipids, suggesting that the antiviral effect of lacidipine is mediated by altered trafficking of lipids. Together, these results identify lacidipine as a novel inhibitor of ZIKV replication that likely disturbs trafficking of lipids needed for replication organelle formation.
Keywords
Zika virusDengue virusLacidipineAntiviral drugsCholesterol transport
1. Introduction
Flaviviruses are positive-stranded RNA viruses, many of which are transmitted to humans via bites of infected ticks or mosquitoes. The mosquito-borne flaviviruses include several viruses that can cause severe disease in humans, such as Zika virus (ZIKV), dengue virus (DENV), yellow fever virus and Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV). After several decades of being considered non-pathogenic, ZIKV emerged as an important human pathogen when it caused an epidemic in the Americas in 2015 and 2016 (Pierson and Diamond, 2018; Wikan and Smith, 2016). While ZIKV infections can be mild or asymptomatic, they can also lead to severe complications such as Guillain-Barré syndrome in adults and microcephaly in newborns exposed to the virus in utero (Cao-Lormeau et al., 2016; Kleber de Oliveira et al., 2016). Although multiple cell types have been implicated in the development of ZIKV-induced microcephaly, direct infection of neural progenitor cells (NPCs) appears to be the main cause (Cui et al., 2016; Gabriel et al., 2017; Retallack et al., 2016; Tang et al., 2016). During normal development, neural stem cells first expand in number before giving rise to NPCs, which have a more limited proliferative potential. Cell division of NPCs can give rise to more NPCs or to neural precursor cells and neurons (Taverna et al., 2014). Upon ZIKV infection, the cell cycle of NPCs becomes dysregulated, which leads to decreased cell proliferation and premature differentiation into neurons. The abnormal cell growth may eventually result in a decreased cortex size, a hallmark of microcephaly (Gabriel et al., 2017). Despite these complications, there are currently no clinically approved antiviral drugs against ZIKV (Shan et al., 2016).

A strategy that may accelerate the identification of safe and effective antivirals is by screening libraries of small molecules that are already approved for therapeutic use for other diseases or that have been tested in clinical trials. Indeed, drug repurposing screens have identified multiple inhibitors of ZIKV and other flaviviruses (Barrows et al., 2016; Retallack et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2016; Yang et al., 2014). Most libraries of clinical compounds contain small molecules targeting human proteins. As a consequence, screening such libraries for antiviral activity is likely to identify compounds that target host factors that are necessary for efficient viral replication (Barrows et al., 2016; Garcia et al., 2021; Gordon et al., 2020). Since host factors are often shared between members from the same virus family and sometimes even between unrelated viruses (Aktepe et al., 2017; Hoffmann et al., 2021; 2017; Zhang et al., 2016), repurposing screens may identify host-directed antivirals with broad-spectrum antiviral activity (Puschnik et al., 2017; Strating et al., 2015; Taguwa et al., 2015).

We previously screened the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Clinical Collection for DENV inhibitors using cells stably expressing a DENV subgenomic replicon. The NIH Clinical Collection is a library of 446 small molecules that are either approved for clinical use or have been investigated in clinical trials. Based on this screen, the antifungal azoles itraconazole and posaconazole, the δ opioid receptor antagonists SDM25N and naltrindole, and the paracetamol metabolite AM404 were identified as DENV inhibitors (Meutiawati et al., 2018; van Cleef et al., 2013; Van Cleef et al., 2016).

Here, we tested the hits from this screen for antiviral activity against ZIKV and identified lacidipine as a potent inhibitor of ZIKV replication. Lacidipine is a calcium channel antagonist of the 1,4-dihydropyridine class that is currently used to treat hypertension (McCormack and Wagstaff, 2003). The antihypertensive effect of lacidipine is mainly attributed to the inhibition of L-type calcium channels (LTCCs) on the plasma membrane of vascular smooth muscle cells (Godfraind and Salomone, 1991; Spampinato et al., 1993). Besides LTCC inhibition, lacidipine was reported to affect a range of other cellular functions, including cholesterol metabolism, antioxidant activity and protein folding in the ER (Bernini et al., 1997; van Amsterdam et al., 1992; Wang et al., 2011). We demonstrate that lacidipine inhibits ZIKV replication in immortalized mammalian cell lines as well as in induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived NPCs. Moreover, we show that lacidipine inhibits viral genome replication, likely by altering intracellular trafficking of cholesterol and lipids, which may impair their redistribution to replication complexes upon infection (Leier et al., 2020; Mackenzie et al., 2007; Perera et al., 2012).

2. Material and methods
2.1. Cells and virus
Vero FM (ATCC CCL-81), HeLa-R19 (RRID:CVCL_M763) and Huh7 (RRID:CVCL_0336) cells were maintained in Dulbecco's modified Eagle medium (DMEM) with 4.5 g/L D-glucose (Life Technologies) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS; Sigma-Aldrich), 50 U/ml penicillin and 50 μg/ml streptomycin (1% pen/strep; Life Technologies) in 5% CO2 at 37 °C. Aedes albopictus C6/36 cells were grown in Leibovitz's L-15 medium (Life Technologies) with 10% FBS, 2% tryptose phosphate broth (Sigma-Aldrich), 1 × MEM non-essential amino acids (Life Technologies) and 1% pen/strep without CO2 at 28 °C.

Healthy human donor-derived induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) containing a doxycycline-inducible rtTA/Ngn2 transgene (Frega et al., 2017) were cultured in Essential 8 Flex medium (Life Technologies) with 1% pen/strep, 0.5 μg/ml puromycin (Sigma-Aldrich) and 50 μg/ml G418 (Sigma-Aldrich) on 0.5 μg/cm2 vitronectin (Life Technologies). Cells were passaged every four to six days as clumps using 0.5 mM EDTA to detach the cells (Beers et al., 2012).

Neural progenitor cells were differentiated from iPSCs according to the monolayer protocol of the STEMdiff Neural System (STEMCELL Technologies). Briefly, iPSCs were seeded as single cells in Neural Induction medium, consisting of STEMdiff Neural Induction Medium with SMADi Neural Induction Supplement (STEMCELL Technologies), 1% pen/strep and 1 × RevitaCell (Life Technologies) onto six-well plates coated with Matrigel (Corning Life Science). The following day, the medium was replaced by Neural Induction medium without RevitaCell. The cells were passaged with Accutase (STEMCELL Technologies) when they reached 80–90% confluence. From passage three onwards, NPCs were maintained in STEMdiff Neural Progenitor Medium (STEMCELL Technologies) with 1% pen/strep (NPC medium). NPCs from passage four and five were used for experiments.

ZIKV strains H/PF/2013, A. taylori-tc/SEN/1984/41662-DAK (Dak84) and MR 766 were obtained from the European Virus Archive. ZIKV strains P6-740 and PRVABC59 were obtained from BEI resources (catalog numbers NR-50245 and NR-50240). Virus stocks were prepared by infecting C6/36 cells at an MOI of 0.1 in complete Leibovitz's L-15 medium. When cytopathic effect (CPE) was visible, the cell culture supernatants were centrifuged for 5 min at 500×g to pellet the cell debris and the cleared supernatants were aliquoted and stored at −80 °C.

Viral titers were determined by end-point dilution assays. Vero FM cells were seeded in 96-well plates at a density of 7.5 × 103 cells/well and inoculated the next day with 10-fold serial dilutions of the virus sample in quadruplicate. CPE was used as a readout at seven days post-infection and the 50% tissue culture infective dose (TCID50) per ml was calculated according to the Reed and Muench method (Reed and Muench, 1938).

2.2. Compounds
Lacidipine (CAS No. 103890-78-4), tunicamycin (CAS No. 11089-65-9), U18666A (CAS No. 3039-71-2), ribavirin (CAS No. 36791-04-5), orlistat (CAS No. 96829-58-2), indatraline (CAS No. 96850-13-4) and AM404 (CAS No. 183718-77-6) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. SDM25N (CAS No. 342884-71-3) was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. All compounds except AM404 were dissolved in DMSO to final concentrations of 10 mM (ribavirin and U18666A), 25 mM (lacidipine and orlistat), 50 mM (indatraline and SDM25N) or 2 mg/ml (tunicamycin) and stored at −20 °C as single use aliquots (except for ribavirin and U18666A, which were used multiple times). AM404 was dissolved in 100% ethanol to a final concentration of 50 mg/ml and stored at −20 °C.

2.3. Antiviral assays
To test ZIKV sensitivity to SDM25N, orlistat, lacidipine, indatraline and AM404 in the initial screen, Vero FM cells were seeded in 24-well plates at a density of 7.5 × 104 cells/well in supplemented DMEM. One day after seeding, the cells were infected with ZIKV H/PF/2013 at an MOI of 0.1 in supplemented DMEM. After 2 h, the medium was replaced with medium containing 10 μM of compound, 25 μM ribavirin or equivalent volumes of solvent. Culture supernatants and cell lysates were collected at 48 h post-infection and subjected to end-point dilution assay and RT-qPCR.

Vero FM cells were seeded in 24-well plates at a density of 7.5 × 104 cells/well in DMEM with 2% FBS and 1% pen/strep (reduced serum medium). The following day, cells were pre-treated with reduced serum medium containing indicated concentrations of lacidipine or an equivalent volume of DMSO for 2 h and subsequently inoculated with ZIKV H/PF/2013 at an MOI of 0.1 in DMEM containing lacidipine or DMSO in the absence of FBS and pen/strep. Two hours post-infection, the medium was replaced by reduced serum medium containing lacidipine or DMSO and culture supernatants and cell lysates were collected at 48 h post-infection for end-point dilution assay and RT-qPCR.

NPCs were seeded at a density of 5.0–6.5 × 104 cells/well in NPC medium in 24-well plates which were coated with Matrigel. Pre-treatment, infection and post-infection medium replacements were performed as described for Vero FM cells using complete NPC medium. Because NPCs require fresh medium every day, half of the cell culture medium was replaced by fresh NPC medium containing the same concentration of compound or solvent after 24 h of the 48 h incubation period. Culture supernatants and cell lysates were collected at 24 and 48 h post-infection and subjected to end-point dilution assays and RT-qPCR.

For the time-of-addition assay, Vero FM cells were seeded in 24-well plates at a density of 7.5 × 104 cells/well in reduced serum medium. The next day, the cells were inoculated with ZIKV H/PF/2013 at an MOI of 5 in DMEM without serum or pen/strep and the medium was replaced 2 h post-infection. At indicated time points relative to the infection, 10 μM lacidipine or DMSO was added to the medium and maintained throughout the experiment until 48 h post-infection, when culture supernatant and cell lysates were collected for virus titration and RT-qPCR. For the pre-treatment-only conditions, cells were incubated with medium supplemented with lacidipine or DMSO only during the 2 h incubation prior to the infection.

2.4. Cell viability assays
Vero cells or NPCs were seeded in 96-well plates, which in case of the NPCs were coated with Matrigel, at a density of 7.5 × 103 or 1.0 × 104 cells/well, respectively. One day after seeding, the compounds or equivalent volumes of solvent were added to the cells. For NPCs, half of the medium was replaced by fresh medium containing the same concentration of compounds or solvent every 24 h. Fifty hours post-treatment, cell viability was determined with the CellTiter 96 AQueous One Solution Cell Proliferation Assay (Promega) using the iMark microplate reader (Bio-Rad).

2.5. Subgenomic replicon assays
ZIKV subgenomic replicon RNA was generated from the pCCI-SP6-ZIKV-NanoLuc plasmid as described previously (referred to as ZIKV-NanoLuc replicon) (Meutiawati et al., 2018; Mutso et al., 2017). Briefly, the plasmid was linearized with AgeI-HF (New England Biolabs) and transcribed using the mMessage mMachine SP6 Transcription kit (Invitrogen). Huh7 cells were seeded in 24-well plates at a density of 7.5 × 104 cells/well and transfected the following day with 500 ng ZIKV-NanoLuc replicon RNA using 4 μl of Effectene Transfection Reagent and 4 μl Enhancer solution (QIAGEN). The medium was refreshed with medium containing 10 μM lacidipine or DMSO at 2 h post-transfection. Cells were lysed at 4 h and 48 h post-transfection in Renilla Luciferase Assay Lysis buffer (Promega) and NanoLuc activity was determined using the Renilla Luciferase Assay Substrate (Promega) on a Modulus luminometer (Turner BioSystems).

2.6. RNA isolation, reverse transcription and RT-qPCR
Total RNA was isolated with RNA-Solv reagent (Omega Biotek), treated with DNase I (Roche) and used for cDNA synthesis using TaqMan Reverse Transcription Reagents with random hexamers (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturers’ instructions. Viral RNA and host gene expression was quantified by RT-qPCR on a LightCycler 480 (Roche) using the GoTaq qPCR master mix (Promega) and the primers listed in Supplementary Table 1. ZIKV H/PF/13 was quantified using the primer pair for the ZIKV H/PF/13 NS3 gene, other ZIKV isolates were quantified with the primer pair PanZIKV NS3 forward and reverse. Data were normalized to β-actin values and relative expression was calculated using the 2−ΔΔCT method (Livak and Schmittgen, 2001).

2.7. siRNA sensitization assay
HeLa-R19 cells were seeded in 96-well plates at a density of 5.0 × 103 cells/well in supplemented DMEM. The next day, cells were transfected with 10 μl of a 20 nM solution of siRNAs targeting GL3 luciferase (negative control), ZIKV NS3 (positive control) or SOAT1, diluted in 30 μl OptiMEM per well using 0.1 μl Lipofectamine RNAiMAX transfection reagent (Invitrogen). Two days post-transfection, the cells were pre-treated with supplemented DMEM containing indicated concentrations of lacidipine, 25 μM ribavirin or an equivalent volume of DMSO for 2 h and subsequently inoculated with ZIKV at an MOI of 0.1 in DMEM containing compounds, in the absence of FBS and pen/strep. Two hours post-infection, the medium was replaced with supplemented DMEM containing compounds. Culture supernatants and cell lysates were collected 24 h post-infection and subjected to end-point dilution assay and RT-qPCR. For siRNA sequences, see Supplementary Table 1.

2.8. Fluorescence microscopy
HeLa-R19 cells were seeded on coverslips in 24-well plates at a density of 3.75 × 104 cells/well in supplemented DMEM. One day after seeding, the cells were serum-starved by incubation in DMEM without FBS or pen/strep for 2 h. For infected cells, serum starvation was combined with infection by inoculating the cells with ZIKV/HPF/2013 at an MOI of 0.1 in DMEM without FBS or pen/strep. After serum starvation, uninfected cells were incubated in medium containing 10 μM lacidipine, 10 μM U18666A or DMSO for 48 h and subsequently fixed with 4% PFA. For the infected cells, the medium was replaced at 2 h post-infection with supplemented DMEM and 10 μM lacidipine, 10 μM U18666A or DMSO was added to the medium at the indicated time points. The cells were stained with 50 μg/ml Filipin III (Sigma Aldrich) for 1 h or with 0.5 μg/ml Nile Red (Sigma) for 30 min in the dark, washed three times with PBS and mounted in Mowiol (Omnilabo). For combined Nile Red and double stranded RNA (dsRNA) staining, cells were first permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 for 5 min and subsequently stained with Mouse anti-dsRNA (clone J2, SCICONS, 1:500) for 1 h in PBS containing 3% normal goat serum. The cells were washed thrice with PBS for 5 min and incubated with Goat anti-Mouse Alexa Fluor 405 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 1:400) in PBS with 3% normal goat serum for 1 h. After washing thrice for 5 min, cells were stained with Nile Red and mounted as described above.

Images were acquired using a 63x oil immersion objective on a Zeiss LSM900 laser scanning microscope with Airyscan. For the Nile Red staining, excitation wavelengths of 262 nm and 559 nm and emission wavelengths of 580 nm and 636 nm were used to visualize neutral lipids and polar lipids, respectively (Greenspan et al., 1985).

2.9. Statistical analyses
Data were analysed using GraphPad Prism 6.01 software. Viral titration data were log-transformed prior to statistical testing. Statistical significance of comparisons between one control group with multiple treatments was tested with one-way ANOVA with Dunnett's post-hoc tests. For pairwise comparisons in experiments with more than one control group, ANOVA with Bonferroni correction was used. For comparisons between two independent groups, student's t-tests were performed. When an experiment required more than two student's t-tests and these analyses were not independent of each other, the Holm-Šidák method was used to correct for multiple comparisons.

3. Results
3.1. Lacidipine has antiviral activity against DENV and ZIKV
We previously reported on selected hits from a screen of the NIH Clinical Collection for antiviral activity against DENV using a cell line containing a luciferase expressing DENV serotype 2 (DENV-2) replicon (van Cleef et al., 2013; Van Cleef et al., 2016). From the 446 tested compounds, 42 compounds reduced cell viability to below 80% of the DMSO control and were excluded from further analysis (Supplementary Table 2). From the remaining 404 compounds, six compounds reduced luciferase activity of the DENV replicon to <50% of the DMSO control. Six different compounds increased luciferase activity with >50%, of which four are corticosteroids (fluticasone propionate, delta1-hydrocortisone 21-hemisuccinate, desoximetasone and beclomethasone), which are known to inhibit the interferon response (Thomas et al., 2014).

Since ZIKV and DENV are evolutionary related mosquito-borne flaviviruses, we hypothesized that compounds with inhibitory activity against the DENV replicon may inhibit ZIKV replication as well. We therefore analysed anti-ZIKV activity of non-cytotoxic compounds that reduced luciferase activity of the DENV replicon at least two-fold: the δ opioid receptor antagonist SDM25N, the lipase inhibitor orlistat, the monoamine transport inhibitor indatraline, the calcium channel inhibitor lacidipine and the paracetamol metabolite AM404. Although the antifungal azole itraconazole was also among the hits from the screen, we excluded it from further analyses, as we previously demonstrated that posaconazole, a compound belonging to the same class as itraconazole, exhibits antiviral activity against ZIKV (Meutiawati et al., 2018).

To screen for antiviral activity, we infected Vero cells with ZIKV H/PF/2013 at an MOI of 0.1 and treated them with 10 μM of each compound, an equimolar concentration of the solvent (DMSO or ethanol) or ribavirin as a positive control. Out of the five compounds, treatment with orlistat, lacidipine and indatraline resulted in reduction of intracellular ZIKV RNA levels of at least 50% (Fig. 1A). Two of these compounds, lacidipine and indatraline, also induced a >100-fold reduction in ZIKV infectious titers without significantly affecting cell viability (Fig. 1B and C). Surprisingly, although indatraline had strong antiviral activity when added 2 h before inoculation, it enhanced viral RNA levels when added at later time points during the course of infection (Supplementary Fig. 1). For the remainder of the study, we therefore focused on lacidipine, a calcium channel antagonist that is approved for the treatment of hypertension.

3.2. Lacidipine inhibits ZIKV replication in vero cells and neural progenitor cells
We next performed a dose response assay in Vero cells infected with ZIKV H/PF/2013 and treated with different concentrations of lacidipine, ranging from 0.5 to 10 μM. Lacidipine treatment decreased ZIKV RNA levels in a dose-dependent manner (half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) = 3.0 μM) (Fig. 2A), whereas viral titers were reduced with more than one log when cells were treated with 5 μM of lacidipine and more than three logs with 10 μM of lacidipine (Fig. 2B). None of the tested concentrations reduced the cell viability with more than 20% (Fig. 2C), resulting in a 50% cytotoxic concentration (CC50) of >10 μM and a selectivity index of >3.3.

To investigate the antiviral effect of lacidipine in a clinically relevant cell type, we carried out experiments in neural progenitor cells (NPCs), generated by differentiation of human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). NPCs are one of the main cellular targets for ZIKV in humans and infection of these cells is an important cause of ZIKV-induced microcephaly (Cui et al., 2016; Retallack et al., 2016). NPCs were treated with 10 μM lacidipine, infected with ZIKV H/PF/2013 and analysed at different times post-infection. We observed efficient accumulation of ZIKV intracellular RNA and infectious titers in the culture supernatant, which was potently suppressed by lacidipine (Fig. 2D and E). Next, NPCs were infected with ZIKV H/PF/2013 and treated with different concentrations of lacidipine. Strikingly, the antiviral effect of lacidipine was much stronger in NPCs than in Vero cells. Lacidipine strongly reduced ZIKV RNA levels and infectious titers with more than half a log at the lowest concentration tested (0.5 μM) (Fig. 2F and G). Importantly, lacidipine concentrations up to 20 μM did not affect cell viability of NPCs (Fig. 2H). We next expanded the concentration range (50 nM–20 μM) and found that lacidipine strongly inhibited ZIKV replication at concentrations as low as 50 nM (IC50 < 50 nM; CC50 > 20 μM), resulting in a selectivity index of >400 (Supplementary Figs. 2A–C). In conclusion, these results demonstrate that lacidipine has strong antiviral activity against ZIKV in both Vero cells and NPCs.

3.3. Lacidipine inhibits ZIKV strains from both African and Asian lineages
ZIKV virus strains are classified into two lineages: the African lineage, which the original MR 766 ZIKV isolate belongs to, and the Asian lineage, which includes the strains from the outbreaks in 2012–2016 (Faria et al., 2016). All previous experiments were performed with the H/PF/2013 strain of the Asian lineage. To examine whether lacidipine also inhibits other strains, we treated NPCs with 10 μM of lacidipine and infected them with two strains from the Asian lineage (PRVABC59 and P6-740) and two strains from the African lineage (MR 766 and Dak84). Treatment with 10 μM lacidipine reduced the viral titers of all strains with more than two logs (Fig. 3A) and ZIKV intracellular RNA to almost undetectable levels (Fig. 3B). These results demonstrate that lacidipine robustly inhibits multiple ZIKV strains of both lineages.

3.4. Lacidipine inhibits viral genome replication
To analyse which stage of the viral replication cycle is targeted by lacidipine, we performed a time-of-addition assay in Vero cells. Cells were infected with ZIKV H/PF/2013 at an MOI of 5 and lacidipine was added at 10 μM at different time points during the experiment (Fig. 4A). Whereas we observed no antiviral activity for the pre-treatment-only condition, we saw robust inhibition of ZIKV RNA and titers when lacidipine was present throughout the experiment or when it was only added after the inoculation period (Fig. 4B and C). Importantly, compound addition as late as 24 h post-infection still resulted in a reduction of more than two logs in ZIKV titers (Fig. 4B). Taken together, these results suggest that lacidipine affects a post-entry stage, most likely translation or replication of the ZIKV genome.

To investigate whether translation or replication was affected by lacidipine, we analysed NanoLuc luciferase expression in Huh7 cells transfected with subgenomic ZIKV replicon RNA at different time points. At 4 h post-transfection, when the replicon RNA is being translated but RNA replication has not initiated yet, luciferase levels between cells treated with lacidipine or DMSO were comparable (Fig. 4D). In contrast, luciferase levels were reduced more than threefold by lacidipine at 48 h post-transfection, a time point at which the luciferase signal derives from newly produced replicon RNA. Together, these experiments indicate that lacidipine inhibits ZIKV genome replication.

3.5. Lacidipine does not inhibit ZIKV by priming the UPR
We next investigated whether lacidipine exerts its antiviral activity by targeting a host pathway or protein. Lacidipine inhibits L-type calcium channels (LTCCs) on the plasma membrane, which is responsible for its antihypertensive effect (Lee and Bryson, 1994). However, other LTCC inhibitors of the same 1,4-dihydropyridine class as lacidipine that were included in the initial screen did not inhibit DENV-2 replication at all or only had minor inhibitory effect (Supplementary Fig. 3). While it is established that all 1,4-dihydropyridines block LTCCs, the off-target effects may differ, especially given their different pharmacokinetic properties (Spampinato et al., 1993; Triggle, 2003). Therefore, it is likely that the antiviral effect of lacidipine is independent of LTCC inhibition.

Wang et al. showed that lacidipine, but not other 1,4-dihydropyridines or LTCC inhibitors of different classes, affects protein folding in the context of Gaucher's disease and moderately induces the unfolded protein response (UPR) (Wang et al., 2011). Because priming the UPR before infection inhibits flavivirus infection via upregulation of interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) (Carletti et al., 2019), we hypothesized that lacidipine may be antiviral due to UPR-induced ISG expression. To test this hypothesis, we infected NPCs with ZIKV or mock medium in the presence or absence of lacidipine or tunicamycin, a known inducer of the UPR. Expression of hallmark genes of all three arms of the UPR, XBP1s (the spliced variant of the X-box binding protein 1 transcript), CHOP (encoding C/EBP homologous protein) and ATF6 (encoding Activating Transcription Factor 6), as well as the gene encoding the central UPR regulator BiP was measured to determine UPR induction. While tunicamycin strongly induced all three arms of the UPR in mock- and virus-infected cells, the UPR genes were not induced in the cells treated with lacidipine or DMSO (Supplementary Fig. 4A). Expression of the ISGs MX1, ISG15, IFI6 and OAS1 was not induced in lacidipine-treated ZIKV-infected cells, presumably due to the reduced amount of ZIKV RNA upon lacidipine treatment (Supplementary Figs. 4B–D). Intriguingly, while tunicamycin treatment of ZIKV-infected cells induced expression of the tested ISGs already at 24 h, which was earlier than for the DMSO-treated ZIKV-infected cells (Supplementary Figs. 4B and C), tunicamycin had no effect on ZIKV RNA levels (Supplementary Fig. 4D). This finding may be explained by the previously reported lower sensitivity of recent ZIKV strains to the type I IFN response (Esser-Nobis et al., 2019). Tunicamycin did, however, reduce viral infectious titers in the culture supernatant at 24 h post-infection (Supplementary Fig. 4E), likely by inhibiting envelope glycoprotein maturation and virion assembly (Gwon et al., 2020).

3.6. Lacidipine does not inhibit ZIKV replication via SOAT1
Another cellular function that was described to be affected by lacidipine is cholesterol metabolism (Bernini et al., 1997). Cholesterol can be synthesized at the ER or taken up from the extracellular milieu in the form of cholesteryl ester-containing low-density lipoprotein (LDL). In the case of LDL endocytosis, the cholesteryl esters are hydrolysed into free cholesterol and subsequently transported to other cellular compartments, such as the plasma membrane and the ER. To prevent free cholesterol-induced toxicity, free cholesterol is converted to less toxic cholesteryl esters at the ER and ultimately stored in lipid droplets (reviewed in (Luo et al., 2020)). These cholesteryl esters are generated by esterification of free cholesterol by the enzyme Sterol O-acyltransferase 1 (SOAT1, also known as ACAT1), which was proposed to be inhibited by lacidipine (Bernini et al., 1997).

We performed a sensitization assay to test whether the antiviral effect of a suboptimal concentration of lacidipine can be enhanced by knockdown of the SOAT1 gene. We transfected HeLa-R19 cells with siRNA targeting SOAT1 and infected them with ZIKV in the presence of a concentration range of lacidipine or DMSO as a control. In the presence of DMSO, SOAT1 knockdown did not affect ZIKV viral RNA and titers, suggesting that SOAT1 is not an essential host factor for ZIKV (Supplementary Figs. 5B and C). Moreover, SOAT1 knockdown did not significantly enhance the antiviral effect of lacidipine (Supplementary Figs. 5A–C), suggesting that the antiviral effect of lacidipine is not due to SOAT1 inhibition.

3.7. Lacidipine affects trafficking of free cholesterol and neutral lipids
Bernini et al. reported that lacidipine increases the ratio of free-to esterified cholesterol, without affecting ester hydrolysis (Bernini et al., 1997). Since expression of the esterification enzyme SOAT1 was not related to the antiviral mechanism of lacidipine, we hypothesized that lacidipine may instead inhibit a process upstream of esterification, such as trafficking of cholesterol or lipids in general. To investigate whether lacidipine alters trafficking of lipids, we treated HeLa-R19 cells with DMSO, lacidipine or U18666A, which inhibits cholesterol export from lysosomes to the ER and peroxisomes (Lu et al., 2015). Staining of polar lipids, a class of lipids that includes phospholipids, did not reveal clear differences between the different treatment conditions, indicating that lacidipine does not alter trafficking of lipids in general (Fig. 5A). However, a dramatic difference was apparent when free cholesterol was stained. Whereas free cholesterol in DMSO-treated cells was visible as a general cytoplasmic signal with small punctae, a dramatic accumulation of free cholesterol in large foci was evident upon lacidipine treatment (Fig. 5B). Interestingly, the phenotype that we observed for lacidipine was different from the phenotype observed after treatment with U18666A, for which free cholesterol was located in a smaller number of foci compared to lacidipine. Lacidipine and U18666A also resulted in different phenotypes when cells were stained for neutral lipids, which includes esterified cholesterol and triglycerides (Fig. 5C). DMSO-treated cells showed a small number of large, bright foci, which are likely lipid droplets, and a relatively uniform cytoplasmic signal. In contrast, we observed an accumulation of foci in lacidipine-treated cells, which were smaller, more numerous and less bright than those observed in DMSO-treated cells. For the U18666A-treated cells, a different phenotype was visible, consisting of a larger number of small, but bright foci. These results suggest that lacidipine leads to an accumulation of esterified cholesterol and/or other neutral lipids, which may explain the antiviral effect of lacidipine.

To confirm that cholesterol and possibly other neutral lipids accumulate during infection as well, we repeated the previous experiment in ZIKV-infected HeLa-R19 cells. Moreover, we included an antibody against double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) to investigate whether the formation or maintenance of replication organelles is inhibited in lacidipine-treated cells. Similar to the uninfected cells, lacidipine treatment did not affect polar lipids, but resulted in the accumulation of free cholesterol and a decreased brightness of the lipid droplet signal (Fig. 6A and Supplementary Figs. 6A and B). In DMSO-treated cells, dsRNA was abundant and present as clusters of smaller foci, some of which were in the vicinity of, but not overlapping with lipid droplets (Fig. 6B–C). In contrast, the dsRNA signal could barely be detected in cells treated with lacidipine or U18666A. Moreover, the dsRNA signal that was present in these cells looked more diffuse compared to the punctate signal in the DMSO-treated cells.

Our time-of-addition assay indicated that lacidipine retains antiviral activity when added at 24 h post-infection, at which stage replication complexes should have already been formed. To assess lipid distribution and dsRNA staining under these conditions, we again infected HeLa-R19 cells with ZIKV, but this time added DMSO or lacidipine at 24 h post-infection. As observed before, there was no difference in polar lipids between both treatment conditions (Supplementary Fig. 7A). In addition, lacidipine treatment at 24 h post-infection still strongly reduced the brightness of the lipid droplet signal as well as the dsRNA signal, (Supplementary Figs. 6B–D), suggesting that lacidipine may affect replication organelle biogenesis as well as maintenance.

4. Discussion
ZIKV infections can lead to severe complications such as microcephaly, which affects newborns for life. It is therefore vital to identify antiviral drugs against ZIKV. By screening compounds from the NIH clinical collection with anti-DENV activity, we identified the L-type calcium channel inhibitor lacidipine as a potent inhibitor of ZIKV genome replication in both standard cell lines and physiologically relevant NPCs. Lacidipine was especially potent in NPCs, where the IC50 was below 50 nM without inducing cytotoxicity.

Although we did not resolve the underlying molecular mechanism, it seems plausible that the antiviral effect of lacidipine is related to the altered trafficking of free cholesterol and neutral lipids that we observed. Cholesterol was previously shown to be relocated to the ER and viral replication sites during infection with DENV and West Nile virus (WNV), respectively (Mackenzie et al., 2007; Rothwell et al., 2009; Soto-Acosta et al., 2017). It is likely that cholesterol plays a role in the formation or maintenance of the viral replication complexes of flaviviruses, either by inducing negative membrane curvature or by affecting membrane rigidity (Churchward et al., 2005; Steinkühler et al., 2019). It remains an open question whether lacidipine inhibits transport of free cholesterol to the ER or whether lacidipine affects cholesterol levels by inducing enhanced autophagy of lipid droplets. Live-cell imaging with more photostable alternatives to filipin, such as cholesterol mimics or BODIPY-tagged cholesterol, may be able to provide an answer to this question (Hölttä-Vuori et al., 2008).

Lacidipine also resulted in an accumulation of esterified cholesterol or other neutral lipids, which are usually stored in lipid droplets. Lipid droplets were suggested to act as scaffolds for encapsidation of the DENV genome (Samsa et al., 2009). Moreover, autophagy of lipid droplets was reported to provide the ATP required for flaviviral genome replication and to be important for virion production (Heaton and Randall, 2010; Zhang et al., 2018). Therefore, if lacidipine affects lipid droplet formation or inhibits lipophagy, it may not only inhibit viral genome replication, but also subsequent stages in the viral replication cycle. In addition, lacidipine could also affect viral entry, as the antiviral effect of lacidipine was strongest when it was added 2 h before infection in the time-of-addition assay. However, we observed a reduction in viral RNA levels in the replicon experiments, in which viral entry is completely bypassed, indicating that lacidipine mediates its effects at least partly at a post-entry stage of the viral replication cycle.

While the NIH clinical collection contains multiple compounds of the same dihydropyridine class as lacidipine, only lacidipine inhibited the DENV replicon, suggesting that the antiviral effect was independent of calcium. In contrast, calcium inhibitors of several different classes were previously reported to inhibit multiple flaviviruses, with several dihydropyridines specifically blocking viral genome replication (Wang et al., 2017). This discrepancy could stem from the differences in experimental design, since DENV replicon RNA was transiently transfected in the study by Wang et al., while we used cell lines that stably expressed the replicon. Of note, Wang et al. also identified lacidipine as one of the most potent inhibitors of JEV replication in Vero cells, but excluded it from further analysis due to the low selectivity index (Wang et al., 2017). We observed that the selectivity index for lacidipine was more than 100-fold higher in NPCs than in Vero cells, emphasizing the importance of testing compounds in clinically relevant cell types, because antiviral activities and cellular toxicities may differ considerably.

Another explanation for the difference in antiviral activity of lacidipine and the other dihydropyridines that were included in the DENV screen could be the higher membrane partitioning of lacidipine compared to many other dihydropyridines (Herbette et al., 1994; Spampinato et al., 1993). In addition, lacidipine is present deep within membranes and only slowly dissociates from them, which could explain why it has a stronger or longer-lasting effect than dihydropyridines that dissociate from membranes more quickly (Herbette et al., 1993). Intriguingly, several highly lipophilic dihydropyridines, but not two hydrophilic ones, were also able to inhibit cholesterol esterification (Canavesi et al., 2004). This effect was independent of whether the compounds had a low or high affinity for calcium channels. Therefore, the antiviral effect of lacidipine may be due to its high lipophilicity, independent of its effect on calcium.

In conclusion, we identified lacidipine as a potent inhibitor of genome replication of DENV and ZIKV and showed that it alters trafficking of cholesterol. Given the importance of cholesterol trafficking in the replication of flaviviruses as well as other arboviruses such as chikungunya virus (Wichit et al., 2017), lacidipine has the potential to be become a broad-spectrum anti-arboviral drug.

Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

Acknowledgements
We thank Finny Varghese, Febrina Meutiawati, Benoit Besson and other current and former members of the laboratory for discussions. We thank Marieke Willemse and the Radboudumc Microscopic Imaging Center for support with fluorescence microscopy, members from the Nael Nadif Kasri laboratory for support with iPSCs and Nael Nadif Kasri for critically reading the manuscript. We thank Andres Merits (University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia) for kindly providing the Zika virus replicon and Andrew Davidson (University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom) for providing the plasmid used to generate the DENV replicon cell lines. ZIKV isolates H/PF/2013, Dak84 and MR 766 were provided by the European Virus Archive (EVAg), funded through the European Union’s Horizon 2020 programme. The following reagents were obtained through BEI Resources, NIAID, NIH: Zika Virus, P 6–740 (NR-50245) and Zika Virus, PRVABC59 (NR-50240). The NIH Clinical Collection was provided through the National Institutes of Health Molecular Libraries Roadmap Initiative. This work was financially supported by a PhD grant from the Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences (RIMLS) to Ronald van Rij.

